RFD 231: New Oracle Join Method (#60609)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0231-new-oracle-join-method.md

  bytes intermediate = 2;
  // Signature is a signature over the challenge, signed by the private key
  // matching the instance identity certificate.
  bytes signature = 3;
  // SignedRootCaReq is a signed request to the Oracle API for retreiving the
  // root CAs that issued the instance identity certificate.
  bytes signed_root_ca_req = 4;
}
```

### Scale

Requests for regional root CAs will be cached instead of repeated on each join attempt.

### Backward Compatibility

The existing Oracle join method will continue to be supported on the server
side for backward compatibility with older joining agents, until v20 (all v19
agents will support the new join method, and v18 agents can't join v20 auth
servers).

Newer agents joining to older Auth servers without support for the new join
method will fall back to using the old Oracle join method, until v19 (all v19
Auth servers will support the new join method, and v19 agents can't join v18
Auth servers).

We will document that the IAM policy required by the old join method will no
longer be required only if both the Auth server and the agent are both on a
version >= whichever version this gets released in.

> Luckily this is being implemented at the same time I'm adding the new join gRPC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily this is being implemented at the same time as the new join gRPC
```

this purpose and requiring this policy on all instances, they assisted us in
finding another method using supported APIs that will have public documentation
soon.

## Details

### UX

The new design will strictly improve UX as compared to the existing Oracle join
method.
Instances will not be required to have membership in any IAM groups and no IAM
policies will be required.
This will decrease the configuration burden and eliminate security questions of
why the policy is necessary.

Configuration on the Teleport side will not change.
The new design will continue to leverage existing Oracle join tokens that
Teleport admins may have configured.
No configuration options will need to change on the agent or bot.

### Design

The new method will leverage OCI instance identity certificates, which are made
available to all OCI compute instances via the IMDS (Instance Metadata Service).
The best docs available on this certificate are the FAQ entries
[here](https://docs.oracle.com/en-us/iaas/Content/Identity/Tasks/callingservicesfrominstances.htm#faq).
This certificate can be retrieved on any instance with the following `curl` command:

```

> curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer Oracle' http://169.254.169.254/opc/v2/identity/cert.pem

Reviewer 2: Is the inclusion of an Authorization header mandatory? I seem to recall that when I tested this last year, this wasn't necessary, so it'd be interesting if they've introduced it in the mean time.

Author: This is OCI's version of IMDSv2, they now strongly recommend disabling IMDSv1 which doesn't require the header

Maybe worth noting that OCI's IMDS v2 is much weaker than AWS IMDSv2, on OCI it's still a single GET request with a known constant header, whereas AWS requires a PUT to get a session token and including the session token in the authz header of subsequent requests

```

The subject OU fields `opc-instance`, `opc-compartment`, and `opc-tenant`
describe the instance's ID, compartment, and tenancy.

In this design the instance provides the identity certificate, a chain of
trust for the certificate, and a challenge signature to the Teleport cluster.
After the Teleport cluster verifies the certificate was legitimately issued by
Oracle and the instance proves ownership of the private key corresponding to
the certificate, Teleport will allow the instance to join the cluster if the
identity matches an allow rule in a configured Teleport provision token.

#### Verifying the certificate chain

All instance identity certificates are issued and signed by an intermediate
CA, which is itself issued by one of Oracle's Instance
Identity Root authorities.

The instance cert and the intermediate CA chain are themselves available via
the instance IMDS at the following URLs:

```
http://169.254.169.254/opc/v2/identity/cert.pem
http://169.254.169.254/opc/v2/identity/intermediate.pem
```

The joining instance will fetch these and include them in the join request.

> However, the Instance Identity Root CAs are only available via an authenticated endpoint:

Reviewer 2: It's a shame this endpoint requires authentication and hence still requires us to leverage the request signing flow. Have we had the opportunity to discuss this with Oracle at all? I can't really see any good workarounds though.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough - I suppose we can hope they'll change this eventually. I did wonder about just embedding these roots into Teleport, but, I figure that they are unlikely to give good notification of when they will rotate these roots - so probably not worth the risk 😭

Author: The expiry on the root CAs in us-phoenix-1 is Apr 18 2028, in ca-montreal-1 it's Jun 3 2029 (just 2 regions i randomly checked). The JSON response at this endpoint includes a refreshIn field that always seems to be the next UTC midnight (currently it's 8 hours from now `"refreshIn" : "2025-10-31T00:00:00.000Z"`). All this to say I agree it's not worth the risk embedding the certs in Teleport

1. The joining instance will sign the request with its own instance credentials using Oracle's Go SDK.
1. The joining instance will not send the request, but dump it to a byte stream.
1. The joining instance will send the raw signed request to Teleport in the join message.
1. The Teleport Auth service will parse the signed HTTP request and verify the host is a legitimate oracle API endpoint matching the expected path.
1. The Teleport Auth service will send the pre-signed HTTP request to the Oracle API over HTTPS.
1. As the Teleport Auth service has verified the legitimacy of the API endpoint and established TLS, it can trust the returned root CAs.

The Auth service handling the join request will then build a certificate chain
including the intermediates sent by the client and the roots fetched from
Oracle and verify the signature on the instance identity certificate.

This process of signing an API request on the instance and having the Auth
service send the pre-signed request to the cloud API is not entirely novel,
it's quite similar to the way our existing Oracle and AWS IAM join methods
work.

> Note: this `https://auth.<region>.oraclecloud.com/v1/instancePrincipalRootCACertificates`

Author: expanded on the request validation here https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/60609/commits/cd8a9a2a8bd1f605911605ea3b84f0135330728f

the instance identity certificate, or at least that it can sign messages using
that private key.
This avoids treating the certificate as a password sent to the Auth service,
the instance proves ownership of the private key without sending it anywhere.

Teleport join methods use bidirectional-streaming RPCs, which allows the Auth
service to issue a "challenge" that the instance must sign with its private
key.
The Auth service can then verify the signature against the public key included in
the instance identity certificate.

The message flow will look like:

1. client->server: ClientInit
1. client<-server: ServerInit
1. client->server: OracleInit
1. client<-server: OracleChallenge
1. client->server: OracleChallengeSolution
1. client<-server: Result

The challenge will be a cryptographically random string generated by Go's
crypto/rand module with 256 bits of randomness.

The private key is made available via IMDS at `http://169.254.169.254/opc/v2/identity/key.pem`.
It is a 2048-bit RSA key.
The instance retrieves the key from the IMDS and generates an RSA-PSS
signature over the challenge, using SHA-256 as the message digest algorithm.

> For future compatibility we will also support ECDSA and Ed25519 signatures if

Author: No, and actually that would be a pretty major breaking change if they started serving keys with a different algorithm at the same IMDS path. I'll drop ECDSA and Ed25519 support. I only had it in because I optimistically wish people would stop using RSA for everything.

### Backward Compatibility

The existing Oracle join method will continue to be supported on the server
side for backward compatibility with older joining agents, until v20 (all v19
agents will support the new join method, and v18 agents can't join v20 auth
servers).

Newer agents joining to older Auth servers without support for the new join
method will fall back to using the old Oracle join method, until v19 (all v19
Auth servers will support the new join method, and v19 agents can't join v18
Auth servers).

We will document that the IAM policy required by the old join method will no
longer be required only if both the Auth server and the agent are both on a
version >= whichever version this gets released in.

Luckily this is being implemented at the same time as the new join gRPC service
described in [RFD 27e](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport.e/blob/master/rfd/0027e-auth-assigned-uuids.md).
The new join service will only support the new Oracle join method, the legacy
join service will continue to support the existing Oracle join method, and we
get all the above backward compatibility guarantees for free.

### Audit Events

> Existing Instance Join audit events will be emitted when an instance succeeds

Reviewer 3: Reply not necessary: should they be modified to note that the new method is being used?
